- [Instructor] When working with Java Collections,
it's common to traverse or iterate through each element
in the collection, one after the other.
Initially, the framework provided an iterator for the task,
or a basic loop was used.
Then, new versions of Java introduced language features
like the enhanced for-each loop,
and streams that gave us new approaches
for navigating collection elements.
At a high level,
we can categorize the approaches for traversing
a collection into three groups,
loops, iterables, and streams.
First let's talk about loops.
These are the trusted while, do-while, and for loops
that we learned when starting out with Java.
They can be used to iterate collection implementations that
allow positional or reference-based access
to the elements that they hold.
You'll notice I've placed for-each loops into this group.
Using its concise syntax requires the object
we are traversing to implement the iterable interface.
So it's still a loop,
but there's some crossover with iterables.
Before discussing iterables and streams,
let's talk about the collection interface methods
that expose these capabilities.
I've divided these methods into two subgroups
based upon the interface they originate from.
The first set comes from the iterable interface
that the collection interface inherits from.
It provides a functional style for-each method,
and access to iterator and spliterator objects
that we'll talk about next.
In Java 8, the collection interface added methods
for obtaining a stream and a parallel stream.
Let's look closer at what the iterable interface provides.
It defines methods for obtaining an iterator
and spliterator, which is used for sequentially accessing
a collection's elements.
When using an iterator, the has next and next methods
are paired with basic loops to step through
the collection's elements one at a time
in a forward direction.
Let's move on to our last category, streams.
Streams support a functional programming style
within Java.
When using this style,
one or more intermediate operations are applied
to a sequence of elements that flow from a source,
like a collection, to form a pipeline.
A single termination operation completes the pipeline
by modifying the elements or returning a result.
The operations used in a pipeline often accept
Lambda expressions that determine the processing
that will be applied to each element.
The processing by any operation on a stream
does not modify the underlying source collection.
However, in some cases, it will return a new collection
without modifying the source.
In this chapter, we'll look closer at using iterators
and streams with collections.